Interview
with Mr. D.A. Anderson, Side 2. I ran across a plan
that I thought was very innovative when we were on
the council, and that was a plan to anchor Mr.
Miller's plan. Yeah, I'm very proud of that. When I
look around and see all of these trees growing that
are about 30 feet tall today, and there's several
up and down this street. And I selected the seed
from the trees at the East Cape and had them planted
out at the sewer plant. Well, some of them were down
at the cemetery as well. And then offered them to
the citizens to plant. And it was obvious at that
time because you could go around and there were no
trees in front of the home. And this was an
opportunity to provide the trees free. And now
some of them told me that live oak would take all,
you know, Years and years to grow. But all you have
to do is look around the parks today. You know,
there are two trees across the street that I
brought in from my neighbor. Look at the trees
around the cemetery and around the parks and put
them around. I feel a little proud when I ride
around. They're from acorns that I collected on
the campus.
I guess it was at the same place, but
we didn't know. Yeah. And did you plan to move to
Stafford? Yeah, that's right. They were about two
or three feet tall. And then a certain day, we made
them available. And we had some city people out
there to dig them up. And I think the company
started out I think they use, I don't know what they
use, I forgot. But we made them available and quite
a few of the trees even went to brine. Oh, really?
Yeah. But I'm sorry that they didn't keep up that
program because I, oh, I make, you know, I had a
heart attack and I make a daily walk of one mile at
least. And, of course, I look at all the trees and,
you know, uh some some of these places could still
stand a few permanent good
permanent trees yeah around the park up here at
thomas park and around the cemetery we put some you
know that as you win the cemetery make the rounds
and use usually light old trees favorite from the
trees and the area then was a lot less tree
populated, I guess, is the best way to put it. Well,
it was here, right. It was fairly rare? Well, yeah,
when I first came. Well, now that was later though.
But people have tried to put in some trees right
along. But a lot of the, you know, there were no
trees. And they were building homes out in open
spaces and no trees around. And here was an
opportunity to put out some small saplings.
Today, they're a nice-sized family.
Well, I think making the
city look, the appearance of the city, making it
look like it's very important for the residents to
create that atmosphere. So I thought that was a,
you know, interesting story. What happened to it?
Did it stop? It stopped after I got out. We, you
know, the suit came along, a lot of things. We
couldn't hardly do much under the suit. We were in
the court down here, the county court. We won down
here under Judge Davis. Then they dragged us over
to the court in Austin and we
were over there. There's another long story there
I could tell too someday. But some parties are
still living. I think that something like this is
ideal. Now, a lot of people will buy trees. Some
people do not know how to buy trees, and they use the
wrong trees in the wrong place. And I see people
still planting sycamore or planting cottonwood.
Well, that's the worst thing in the world they can
do. And they really need some advice. I think the
city made a fuss when they were fixing this parking
area here, too, and attempted to save the trees.
Well, all the trees died. I could have told them
that had they come to me. I would have told them they
would die and why. But no, whoever plotted or
planted that parking space, I can understand.
They sure didn't seek advice. Well,
they put, you know, there was a huge pine tree. They
tried to save it. And all the rest of the other trees
there, you know, they made new islands around it.
Well, they were going to die. I knew that. A pine,
number one, a pine needs an acid site, acid soil.
That's why pine trees do not grow here naturally.
They grow in East Texas where the soil is acid. And
any pine tree that is planted here produces twice
the tendency to produce its own acid through the
deposition of needles and things of this nature.
But then you come along with that lime and spread
that lime all over and spray that lime all over the
tree. You go and cut, sever the roots. And I just
cringed when I saw what they were doing. And I'm
knowing what was going to happen. And why they
didn't come to somebody or go. Why didn't they go to
the people they had that knew something about
trees? I get upset when I go around walking around
here and see the type of trees people are still
planting. And why they don't, intelligent
people, why do they plant a tree in a certain
location? We wouldn't want to plant a live oak You
want heat or sun in the winter around here. You
don't want to be shielded by a big old light on a tree
that will make part of your house cold during the
winter. You know, little things.
Well, that's something else. I haven't told them
about getting my thoughts on this yet. I haven't
seen Gary. I chatted and corresponded with him
here not too long ago about another matter. I want
to see him about that. Yeah. Yeah,
I know. Who burned it?
No, that was a friend of mine. I say friend. He's a
colored friend. Oh, I see. And he said it to
integrate
the schools. I was wondering if it was something he
asked today. They were having a discussion. No, I
will not tell you who. Oh, yeah. But I know, and he
did it to me with a big laugh.
But he burned it in order to integrate the schools.
And that was the first parks or recreation area
that I tried to establish for the Negro community.
I had what I called a mayor's committee made up of
black people in the community. There were, I
think, about nine from every segment of the city
then, and with the different churches
represented. You've got to study that thing so
that there would be, you know, this cross-section
balance. We met right here.
And at first, they were reluctant to say anything
to me. You know, even though a lot of them knew me,
they just didn't know what. So about the third
meeting, they began to open up. And
how... the city could help them and what we could do
with our financial resources and the like. Now,
the Lincoln, or not the Lincoln, but the street.
Going all
the way down. Not
Lincoln? Lincoln, Lincoln, Lincoln. Lincoln was
one of the streets that they wanted in for that
neighborhood over there. And the county road, the
extension of the county road to the Wilbur Road was
one over here. And we discussed that here and how
that would help to get them out of the mud over there
and do things over there. We also got in to such
things as Let's see, housing, 238 housing,
328. Yeah, for the put-in houses. We discussed
that. And then there was a, I forget his name. We had
an area then over in the south side, I forget what
street that was on, where we started to build
houses. under the HUD program for a very
reasonable cost. And the group that sat around
here thought that would be a good idea and that that
would get some people out of their present homes
and such good homes. Well, they built. I haven't
been over there lately. It seemed to me they built
around 5,000 or 6,000.
And I encourage them. I mean, it was program 235 or
238. This was my attempt to help the colored
people. But they never took to it. For some reason,
they never wanted to move into the rain after these
homes were built. And that program went downhill,
you know, fast. And then we had a meeting
following, well, I wanted to know why on things
like this. Then they brought out the matter of most
of them, where they worked, and the low salary and
monthly rate. And I said, well, with your help, I'd
like to make a survey of all the Negro people in
College Station. And I'll need your help, because
without it, it wouldn't be any good at all. And they
agreed. And we surveyed every Negro home in the
community. They did. And they guaranteed me that
this was an accurate survey that never had one been
done so completely. And I knew where each one
worked, like in the shoe factory or university,
wherever they worked, number of children.
Everything, every facet. in this survey, and then
I put it all together, and several enlightening
things came out of the survey. We met here and
discussed them. Those were working for the
university. Some of them were also at the really
low end of the scale on a knowledge basis. Some had
worked 15 years for the university and still had no
benefits. They had nothing. So then I took this
survey. Now, that's in the city. I only wished I had
kept it private. I took the survey then and went to,
I think it was Rudder.
I think it was Rudder. And related to him some of the
problems that we had in the city in terms of the
colored people and their treatment at the hands of
the university. And within a year, Rudder had done
quite a bit in getting them on a permanent, you
know, like instead of $2.40 an hour, $3 an hour,
they would be making $300 a month. And then, but
they'd get hospitalization and sickness, you
know what I mean, the things that this makes. Now,
no one knows this, but I worked hard. and getting
this for the colored people in the community, all
based on that survey. And then we finally worked
through the Lincoln Street and the County Road,
extension of County Road. Then we came to the
Lincoln Center. This was another project. And I
mentioned the burning. We got into burning. But
I went ahead. And they told me that they'd do what
they could. So we made that into a parks building,
you know, for recreation. And I've never had so
many frustrations in my life. You know, the kids
over there would throw rocks and break the windows
and tear down the doors. And I'd almost cry. And I
said, now, fella, I can't go to my city council and
get them to approve the maintenance of that
building just continually. I said, I'm trying to
do it. And I know you fellas are. And they were
trying, Steve. So I said, something has to be done.
Otherwise, we'll just have to give up on it. And I
even went so far as to arrange for the purchase of
some land behind that at that time. It was another
lot. I think it was a lot, yeah.
So then we met over there at the community center
and brought in some other local people. And of
course they were there, you know, just to listen,
so to speak. And I explained to the whole group over
there what our problem was and that I was trying to
do it for them. And, you know, it was a place where
their kids could go. And I needed their help, and
unless I could get it, well, we'd just have to give
it up. And they got up, and, hey, Anderson, we
pledge to you, we do this and that. And they did.
After a while, they took care of the kids that were
doing all that stuff. And most of the Negro
community today, at least the old people, You ask
them about me, and I'll tell you, you won't have
any, they'll do anything for you. Oh. Well, I was
curious, had a committee for the Negro people been
established before? Oh, no, no. I started it. Why
did you decide to start it? Oh, I started all the
committee idea myself. That was during my regime.
We never had all these committees. Okay. No, the
only one we had was the cemetery committee. But
beyond that, that was really the, the planning
zone. But the other committees I instituted
because I saw need of traffic safety and these
others. And so this, that was my idea. Well, why
would they continue if they don't have a debate in
here? Do you know why? Well, you have to, it was my
committee, you might say, because I could, I had
rapport You know, it got to the point where they'd
call me up at night and say, well, Mayor Anderson,
there's a fella from Houston over here at the Green
Lantern, you know, over on the other side. And he's
here to cause trouble. And he'd even describe him
sometimes. So I'd call the police, and the police
would go over there and get him and take him out. In
other words, where they'd begin to help me and help
themselves, too. Yeah,
I know, but it wasn't then. Oh, and my heart bled
because, you know, people would criticize me,
well, you're just like a nigger. I mean, what are
you trying to do? And I was doing everything I could
to help them. And there's one thing, you know, I
don't want it on the record, so I'll erase it. When I
went in, I had a little problem with, of course, the
standard of living was low. And they would come,
well, they tried to, we had a little kitty set up in
the county administered by Bill, the president,
Bill. But that money was, you know, I think the city
of College Station put $100 in it. The county put
$100. Brian put $100 in it. And this was for
indigent people that really weren't the
desperate straights to use. And we had some
situations out here in College Station among the
blacks that were desperate. And I tried
everything, through the churches and
everything, to help all of them that I possibly
could. And in desperation, I set up, and this, of
course, was an outgrowth, too, of our meetings,
you might say a fun, personal, in the Baptist
church now, with the stipulation, and I added to
it, you know, month by month, as I could, with the
stipulation that anybody that needs that money,
there was one woman that had cancer and
had to be used for treatment. With the stipulation
that anybody that needed money could borrow it, uh
from this fund if they could pay it back well i
expected to pay them back but if not just forget
about it and before i established that fund i had
all kinds of problems you know with people coming
for me to me for help but once i got that fund put in
and in place and got it started and added to it that
really fixed it up
And with my heart, I feel good about that, more so in
a lot of things. But I wouldn't want anybody.
Well, that is wonderful. Yeah. But I tried to do
everything that I could for them. Well, for
everybody. Because Saturday, you know, I was all
over the city on Saturday. Any complaint, anybody
had any, you know, I would say. Yeah. Well, before
the fire at Lincoln was set, had there been... had
people
been discontented among the Negro community
because they were frustrated that they wouldn't
be in the same school? That's right. Is that right?
So it not only occurred in the conversation, it
also occurred to me why at the same time they were in
the same school. Oh, yeah. But it's interesting,
you know, knowing the history of London. That's
right. Who did it and all. Of course, the record
will never know. I mean, there'll be no record.
When you
were on the council, what was the council's
feeling or length of feeling about promoting
commercial growth? As
I read,
it really wasn't in the late 50s, well, not in the
40s, late 50s. It was in the very early 50s. It
wasn't very much commercial growth. And then it
really picked up after that. And I was wondering
what my college was like.
I don't know how to answer
that. I was just trying to think of the growth.
Actually, we didn't really have much growth until
later
than that. You said 50, didn't you? Yeah. The only
primary growth was over on the other side of the
track. But if I remember, for example, those
paying the highest taxes in the city of College
Station, even up through 1962 or so, was Luther
Jones. And Luther was, he had a number of houses
that he was renting. So maybe for that reason he had
to pay more taxes. I was looking at something not
too long ago when I saw it fell down.
There wasn't really too much growth during
Langford's period. We had the, you don't remember
the Bluetooth ports going in? No, I don't
remember, but I heard of them. Yeah. See, they went
out of business, and that was a surprise to me. But
that
was early on, yeah. But
there was
no push to bring in, um, the latest kind of industry
here? No, not, not in, not particularly. But there
was not a need for it? Well, it was just a small
community here. And, uh, I guess our main concern
then was, uh, fighting, and I don't say fighting,
but getting along with Brine people. In the early
years? Well, during Langford's period. For
example, I don't know whether the records reflect
it or not, but if you read between the lines, we got
word one night that the city of Brine was going to
incorporate the airport and university land on
the first week. This came from a reliable source.
So we met in an emergency session
and incorporated all that land ourselves.
Now that, of course, foreclosed on them taking the
initiative. that is why all university land is
within the city of columbus today what
year i'd say around 63
but i mean you know this these were little things
and the agitator was quite a bit You know, this
community was always different
because
it was
an educational community. And, well, there were
so many things, right? We were, you know, about
seven miles from Bryan. I mean, it was an old
country road that blacked out the road between me
and Bryan at that time. Brine was a fur piece, you
know, the town. And they didn't like a lot of
things. We had our own hardware store in the
University Hall. They made us close in. And they
didn't like the idea of the creamery out there.
They didn't like the idea of, you know, we used to go
out and pick berries and, you know, pick three
quarts and get one and all this kind of stuff. They
didn't like that. There were a lot of things that
just kept, kept agitating. You know, our group out
here. Oh yeah, it was during the Lankridge period.
Just little things came up. And then when I got in, I
mentioned to you this matter of the taxes. And the
same thing came up about wiring houses.
Somebody was filed on and from college station for
wiring a house in brian and he had a phd in
electrical engineering and but he didn't have his
license from brian but brian that wouldn't give
anybody in college so that posed another of my
problems and i did the same thing as i did with taxes
And within the full space of a day, why, it was all
rectified. But I mean it, you know, just one of
these little things. But then you got to get back
and understand some of the early families in
Grimes liked to control everything. You know,
that's another part of the thing. What bank in
Grimes liked to do the controlling? Well... I
think you don't want to talk about it. Well, you
know, a certain thing. Like to dominate
everything in the community. If anything went on,
any elections were held. It had to be just like they
wanted it. Their candidate had to win. You know,
things like that. That's part of the political
picture that exists. For example, I was trying to
get a nursing home out here. Well, a nursing home,
and it was supposed to be a sort of a retirement
village that would be constructed six miles down
the road here just outside the city. It would
eventually come into the city, but it would be an
ideal thing because they were going to put sort of a
clinic with that and had the approval of the then
doctor, two doctors in the city of College State.
But Brian got on the ball and stopped
him. How did they stop him? Through this esteemed
senator, Bill Moore. You know, it's politics.
Which are very complicated. Oh, yeah. Well, the
bank that you were talking about today, he has on
the college station a collection too, the Brian
bank? No, but they wanted to control everything.
They controlled taxis. They controlled
electricians. See, they didn't have everything.
In other words, you couldn't build without
somebody in brine. You build according to
standards out here, but no one could do it except
someone from brine. I mean, wire your house or, you
know, do things like this. So that's not right. I
don't like injustice regardless of where it is.
Well, they have the contractors. And they did the
wiring. And they're the ones that were authorized
to do it. Not to work in Bryan. But Bryan people
could work either in Bryan or Colorado State.
because
we recognize you as being qualified to do it. But
Brian says, well, that's all right, but we're not
going to recognize your people because we want to
keep fire and we want
to keep control. They wanted to keep the control,
that was the key. Well, did the bank that you were
talking about, was it interested in college
station officers? Oh, yeah. It was interested in
controlling whatever went on in Grants County.
Okay,
we've talked
about it off and on, but I wanted to ask you some
questions about your years as mayor. And you were
the first mayor after my first, and here you were
starting a period after someone had been off with
you for 24 years. What did you, how did you want to do
things differently, or how did you pursue the role
of mayor? Or are they the same? but there was a
change in the city now. Oh, yeah, well, I think it
was reflected in that five-year plan in a way. You
read that over there. Yes, we did. You submitted it
in your first year, I think. I don't know whether it
was the first year or not. I just forget now. But the
things that were enumerated there were things
that I wanted to see done. Now, that change in the
name that brought all that all over the United
States from College Station, you know,
malfunction junction and all that kind of stuff, I
had to close that down. But I was really sincere,
and I see it still coming up. You know what I mean.
College Station, I mean, it's still, I wish we had
Aggieland Something else. A lot of these things
were in my mind. I tried to go through various
areas. We had an explosion on the other side of the
track and a former chemical plant over there. I was
interested in that. I walked the railroad track, I
guess about eight miles, and made a report on the
track. It was bad then. I mean, the nails and the tie
and everything else. They figured out the
topography of the land and if there was a spill,
where the spill would go. And, you know, down by the
topography of the land and expressed some concern
there and what could be done or should be done. In
all of these areas, I just Now, that plan, that
five-year plan, so to speak, I referred that to, if
I recall, 100 citizens. And for their comment,
digest, input, criticism, everything else. And I
heard from most of them. And after I heard, well,
then I had a better understanding of things, you
know, Some of them, you know, were very good. A
little thing like the cemetery, you know, I
studied that for a little bit about the land. Did we
have enough land? Would that land furnish us for
how many years, you know, 20, 30 years? What
restrictions should we place on it other than
those we have right now? I don't know about the
flowers they have right now, but that's something
else. Oh, I gave everybody an opportunity to buy
the plots. The land cost for the plot cost was very,
very low. Way people were coming. And a lot of
people combined were coming out here because of
the trucks. So I gave our people an opportunity to
buy lots before we upped the price. And then
appointed people that were really, at that time,
very interested
in the cemetery. And I tried to look at each area for
safety. The highway department didn't have too
much money. They had some federal money for signal
lights, but In the area of signal lights, you know,
I tried to evaluate it there with others and spoke
to Joe Hanover and as many as I could on, well, on
each area that went into that five-year report.
But then I knew that I wouldn't be approved when I
got the Boyette one. Oh,
didn't you talk about the Boyette section? Can you
name the other ones that were on the council? Yeah.
And who else were there? Oh, they varied. They
represented the three wars.
Boynton and this other war, I can think of them all.
I forgot their names. Some of them, you know, they
were on and then another one came on. Yeah, he's
gone.
Yeah. He went with them. Yeah.
But that would be the three there.
That's right. But Rosbam was on last, but there was
another fellow on before him. I mean, they swapped
off. The thing about it, I went to Rossman and sat
down in his home and spoke to him about a lot of these
things. And he agreed with me. He said, you know
what I mean, Andy, that's right. It should be this
way. This should be done. This should be done. And I
said, well, why then can't you, why won't you
support me? Why the heck? The people want this. Why
are you denying it to them? Well, you know, after
he's a good friend of mine, and this, that, and the
other, and we go to a council meeting, I never
could. I never could change it. So then from the
next council, you know, I could almost dictate who
would end. You know, who do you want as councilman?
From
then
on, I didn't have any problems at all. We were
talking about your five-year plan. Was this
something that you started on? Had Mr. Lankford
made a list of goals? No. This was really mine. You
asked, you know, what was your thinking about the
future. And these are some of the things that came
to mind that I haven't looked at, and I haven't
talked to you about, and I haven't looked at. Okay,
I also... You looked it over, didn't
you? Yes, I did. Sure did. Also, you were the first,
and your administration was the first to have
annual reports. Right. That was part of it. I felt
that we needed to communicate with the public,
yes, but what... The different departments were
doing, you know, what we were doing. Do you know if
they still have the papers? They do not. They
don't? It terminated after I got out. Who got these
papers? Well, some papers. Well, I know the city
got those papers now, but a lot of cities still use
the news media to get an annual report to the
people. Oh, I see. The paper that you're reading.
Yeah, they take maybe two or three pages or four
pages or something like that. and
give them stewardship for the
city. And I just felt that it was well for us to, you
know, let the people know just what was going on
with Cleveland City. Right. Oh, yeah. Everybody
was on the city's head in those kind of times. Also,
I noticed that you, well, we talked about
this, you decided that
there should be more committees, is that right?
Yeah. Yeah, I started with committee council.
There was only a handful of committees? Well, the
only thing is I recall on this planning zone, what
kind of things? And what other ones did you
install? Well, I installed the parks, traffic
safety,
There are about six of them. Oh, well, in my black
community.
Oh, yeah, beautification.
All right. A
what? Sanitary? I'd have to look it up. Okay. But,
you know what I mean. In all these areas... Well,
sanitation, yeah. Because we had rodent control.
We had several problems when I was mayor. There was
one polio.
And we started collecting mosquitoes and sending
them down to Houston for analysis. I don't know if
that's in the record or not. Well, I started that
because horses around here were getting polio.
And polio wasn't, at that time, you know, wasn't
really under control. And I thought this would be a
helpful method to, or a step, to control. But if we
knew that the mosquitoes around here had, well, we
sprayed, but I mean we could intensify our spray
and get, people more aware of the fact that if you
get out at night or, you know what I mean, get bitten
by mosquitoes, that there is a chance that you may
get polio. And then there's another, I remember
one instance where we had a rat problem. And that
rat problem was primarily on a creek dividing
brine and polystation. And this is where my
committee came into play. Jim Ford was my rodent
man. I picked a dentist, a rodent, veterinarian.
Yeah, it was a sanitary committee, yeah. And so I
called on this committee and picked the rodent man
to eliminate the rats they were coming in the
garages you know where the uh well that where that
creek area is between the two cities yeah yeah yeah
so uh he went over there and he got rid of now we were
using stuff nobody nobody he knew what he was doing
but he got rid of what he was doing Is that not
allowed? It's not allowed today. It's not? Oh. But
it got rid of them. Well, it got rid of them. You
could go over there during the daytime, and they
were running around in the garages.
It was the kids. See, these are the things that
worried me. I mean, anybody say anything against
College Station, boy, I'd just . This was
my city. Well, the committee may not be the same
today, but they still have a lot of committees. So
apparently, you started a . Well, I started the
committee out in . But this health committee, I
remember the mosquitoes and the rats and
something else. I haven't had time to think about
some of these questions. Also, I noticed that You
wrote letters to them and memos to their
councilmen, just discussing what ought to be
done. I didn't know they still had them done. I
wrote a weekly letter to all the councilmen. There
are some of them. I don't know if it's complete or
not. Is this something that you get to talk about? I
felt, see, I was in closer touch with what went on in
the city on a daily basis. And I figured that the
council should be aware of some of the things. You
know, some of them were short, one page. It
depended on what transpired that week. And in
order to keep them appraised of what went on, well,
I wrote these little notes. Was it something you
all did in May or something like that? No. It was
something you did? Yes. Okay. Also, I had read that
you tried to put a city library and city archives
together and establish . Yeah, but that never,
that never panned out. We never had the money.
And this is, uh, I don't know what I was thinking
about. This is Thomas, F.L. Thomas. The park is
named that way. And we owe him this Thomas. He was a
great friend of mine. Well,
I could do nothing lying on that side.
But one
thing she wanted was the establishment of a
library. And she'd donate all her books. I think
she still has them. She has them. She has a wife. You
know, she used to have a radio program for kids
daily and weekly and something. She used to be very
active. And she and others wanted to give her
books, but they'd only give to the city council.
And so I... I did all that I could to establish a
possible library. I even considered
establishing it in connection with the school.
But I don't know. I just never got around to the
finances and everything else. Well, that's
something they fill in. I know. what i um were
referring to were the archives established in
some way to to categorize oh yeah that's uh i uh i met
with objection
when i went in they were doing